>> The financial system has been
turned on its head in the past
few months with the rise of
what has been nicknamed "meme
stocks."
But is this grassroots movement
of regular, everyday investors
a passing trend, or could
they really transform
the way our economy
works going forward?
This is "Gaia News."
Meme stocks, called
such because they
are ordinary stocks fueled by
people through social media--
their value can spike
based on zeitgeist
and not the fundamentals of
the companies they represent.
As a result, they can
oftentimes be highly volatile.
Made famous by the popular
subreddit, WallStreetBets,
this is truly a
grassroots movement.
But even with the
increased volatility
that comes with these
stocks, investors
are not shying away from them.
Many investors are doubling
down despite warnings
from financial institutions, or
is it perhaps in spite of them?
But what is driving the
popularity of meme stocks,
and why do they continue
to grow contrary to what
markets dictate?
Zeus Yiamouyiannis, author
of "Transforming Economy:
From Corrupted Capitalism
to Connected Communities"
explains.
>> Well, the first
thing, I think,
is the larger social phenomenon
of the little guy getting
screwed and the big
guy rigging the game.
And it has never
been more rigged,
and the concentration of wealth
has never been more dramatic.
And so what happens is, it
creates this groundswell
of a desire to strike
back at an unfair system,
to strike back at
these profiteers,
and to win one for
the little guys.
And the language for doing that
has been this language of meme.
It's snarky.
It's satirical.
It's edgy.
And you see this
with GameStop, which
is the premier, obviously,
example of the meme stock.
First of all, the
reason for GameStop
is many people had a
nostalgic association,
didn't want to see this go down.
So that was a real
positive motivation.
And they had that the
negative motivation,
which was to absolutely
screw these short sellers
and these big hedge funds by
going ahead and blowing up
their shorting.
>> When hedge funds short a
stock like GameStop or AMC,
they're betting on these
companies' stock going down
and making profit
from their demise.
When some investors
saw this happening
to their favorite
companies, they
decided to do
something about it.
>> The guys rebelled.
It was WallStreetBets.
They said, wait a minute.
Let's all jump on the bandwagon,
do the exact opposite.
There were memes and messages
to send out to the internet.
And nerds of all stripes and
all ethnicities jumped on,
and people who really wanted
to say screw the big guys
and, you know, I don't
want this nostalgic thing--
AMC is another one.
I don't want movies
to go away, and I
don't want these great
little video game
stores that I'm used to,
when I was a kid growing up,
to go away.
I want to keep hold of these.
>> But how can investments based
on nostalgia and emotions have
a lasting effect on a financial
model that is so rooted
in our economic foundation?
>> I think meme stocks
are a foray or a spearhead
into piercing the
financial guard.
The old guard will
move the goal post.
That has to be part
of their game plan.
They'll even do it
in your face, in ways
that can be either semi-criminal
or even outright criminal,
just to laugh at you.
But that kind of
arrogance creates
more energy of resistance.
And heading into the future, is
to go ahead and recognize this.
We recognize it.
We find ways to
withdraw our energy.
We find ways to create
alternative forms of exchange.
>> With a large amount of money
up for grabs and an economic
model in flux, is there a
healthy and unhealthy way
to approach these new markets?
>> The healthy motives of
engaging in name stocks
and cryptocurrency are the
desire for decentralized,
non-top-down, basically autonomy
and sovereignty for ourselves.
If you're willing
to lose your money
to move things in
the right direction,
you know you're not
doing it for simply greed
or profiteering or opportunism.
And you're doing
it in a way that
is coherent with your own virtue
and with the sustainability
of the world.
And with meme stocks
and cryptocurrency,
you see this kind of
inveterate opportunism
and just plain, old greed.
That is a virus introduced
by that centralized, top-down
people to keep us down.
Right?
We have to confront that.
You know?
And one way to confront that
is to look at our motivations
for getting into
cryptocurrency and meme stocks
and get rid of the bad motives
and go for the good ones.
>> Even if we can succeed in
stamping out the corruption
and change the system
for the better,
is there any way that we can
make sure these changes are
lasting?
>> What we've learned is that no
amount of new technology or new
thing is going to
save it for us.
Cryptocurrency is not
going to save us, right?
Meme stocks aren't
going to save us.
What's going to save
us is when we really
go for a win-win situation, when
we understand that we're not
in a competitive relationship
and a paranoid relationship
with each other.
That, literally, the
enhancement of community
will enhance my
individuality, right?
And the enhancement
of my individuality--
my own divine
genius, that which I
have to offer, my talents,
well-received and respected--
are going to enhance
the community.
That is the key right there.
That's the metaphysical
and even practical key.
We need to break from this
competitive, dog-eat-dog
mentality based in fear.
That's the single most
important thing we can do.
>> Though meme stocks might
have started out as a joke,
their impact on the
economy is undeniable.
But will this
grassroots movement
turn out to be the linchpin
to the sweeping changes
to move forward with a fair and
democratic financial system,
or is this just a passing fad?
If we question why we are
investing the way we are,
could that lead to making
a difference in the world?
For a new perspective,
this is "Gaia News."
For more information
on this topic,
check out this content on Gaia.